# Introduction to Skywing

Skywing is a library designed to provide tools for a user to build
decentralized, parallel, highly-asynchronous software in a manner that
is highly resilient to problems in the computational environment such
as hardware failures, network failures, and malicious actors
(i.e. cyber intrusions). It does so by providing a suite of resilient
software and algorithmic "building blocks" which implement resilient
functionality designed to adapt around problems. If a user writes
their program in terms of these Skywing building blocks, their program
inherits these resiliency properties automatically.

For example, if a user needs to compute a summation over a group of
devices and does through via Skywing' reduce function, which
implements a number of features to adapt around failed or misbehaving
devices, the user's program benefits from that resilience.

# Basic Concepts in Skywing

An individual device running software using Skywing is called an
**agent**. A collection of Skywing agents working together is called a
**collective**. If two agents directly communicate, they are called
**neighbors**. Often all agents in a collective are running the same
application, but this need not be the case.

Although Skywing is designed for the use case in which agents are
spread out across an edge-based computing network, this is not
actually a requirement to run a Skywing collective. In fact, for
learning and testing purposes it is often most convenient to run
multiple agents on a single computer.

## Establishing Connections and Communicating

When an agent starts, it must be provided with the IP addresses and
ports of 0 or more neighboring agents, at which point it will reach
out and attempt to establish connections. If an agent receives a
connection request from another agent, it will accept, at which point
the connection becomes symmetric.

Skywing agents *do not* need to know about all other agents in the
collective. The requirement is simply that the graph of initial
agent-to-agent connections must be connected. Although this is the
minimum requirement, it is often helpful for resilience purposes to
make the initial connections graph more than just a tree, so that if
any devices fail the rest of the collective can still fully connect.

Once initial connections are made, Skywing agents communicate via a
publish/subscribe paradigm: An agent declares that it will publish a
stream of data under a unique string ID called a **tag**, and other
agents can subscribe to this stream via the tag. Agents maintain
records of tags that they publish and that other known agents
publish. If an agent wishes to subscribe to a tag for which it knows
no publishers, the collective executes a search protocol to find an
agent that publishes that tag, at which point the subscribing agent
establishes a new connection with the publisher.

This approach means that agents need to know very little about the
collective at startup; through connnections and collective searches,
publication and subscription streams are established as needed.

## Skywing Managers and Jobs

The Skywing software is designed to enable highly asynchronous
workflows. To that end, each Skywing agent runs a **Manager** thread which
handles agent-to-agent connections, search protocols, and the
specifics of messaging. A **Job** is a thread of execution written by
the Skywing user. It will declare the IP and port of any initially
known agents, will declare intent to publish streams of data and their
associated tags, and will request subscriptions from the Manager. The
Job will also leverage the Skywing user library to request Skywing
objects that can perform reduces, iterative methods, and other
collective operations.

# Your First Skywing Program

## Building Skywing

Build instructions can be found in the [root readme file](/README.md).

## My first Skywing program

Let's write a Skywing program that establishes a connection between two
agents and sends some data back and forth. We will go through this
step by step.

First, we will `#include` the primary Skywing header file, and we will
create a `main` program that reads in an agent index and builds a
`Manager` object:

```
#include <iostream>
#include "skywing_core/skywing.hpp"

int main(const int argc, const char* const argv[])
{
  using namespace skywing;
  std::string machine_name = argv[1];
  std::uint16_t machine_port = static_cast<std::uint16_t>(std::stoul(argv[2]));
  Manager manager(machine_port, machine_name);
```

All we have done so far is create a `Manager` object. But this object
doesn't do anything yet. Next we will submit a Job to run and execute
it. To do this, we must provide the Skywing Manager with a *function*
that we wish to execute as a Job. This function has a well-defined
signature, and must accept a reference to a `Job` object, as well as a
handle to the `Manager`. For now, let's create a job that doesn't do
anything:

```
  manager.submit_job("job_name", [&](Job& job, ManagerHandle manager_handle)
  {
    std::cout << "Hello Skywing world!" << std::endl;
  });
  manager.run();
```

This block of code submits a function to execute as a Job (which in
this case just prints a message and returns) and than asks the
`manager` to run all its submitted jobs.

Ta da! We have our first Skywing progam. Altogether, it looks like this:

```
<ex1.cpp>

#include <iostream>     
#include "skywing_core/skywing.hpp"

int main(const int argc, const char* const argv[])
{
  using namespace skywing;
  std::string machine_name = argv[1];
  std::uint16_t machine_port = static_cast<std::uint16_t>(std::stoul(argv[2]));
  Manager manager(machine_port, machine_name);
  manager.submit_job("job_name", [&](Job& job, ManagerHandle manager_handle)
  {
    std::cout << "Hello Skywing world from agent " << machine_name << "!" << std::endl;
  });
  manager.run();
}
```
Note that we added a little extra info in the printed message.

Now let's compile and run it. Skywing requires C++17 and a few include
directories. Here's what we need to include:
 * Path to skywing includes
 * Path to spdlog includes (for logging), in the subprojects folder
 * Path to gsl, in the subprojects folder
 * Path to cap 'n' proto includes, unmanaged by Skywing, but if you successfully built Skywing you have this. Often accessible through pkg-config
 * Path to *generated* cap 'n' proto includes, in the Skywing build directory

And we need to link to the following:
 * The cap 'n' proto library
 * The `skywing_core` library

For example, a typical build command might look like the following:
```
g++ -std=c++17 ex1.cpp -o ex1 -I$(skywing_root)/skywing -I$(skywing_root)/subprojects/spdlog/include -I$(skywing_root)/subprojects/gsl/include -I$(skywing_root)/build/generated_files/generated `pkg-config capnp --cflags --libs` -L$(skywing_root)/build/skywing/skywing_core -lskywing_core
```

(It's certainly a bit of a mouthful, and in practice a build system
like CMake or meson makes this a lot easier.)

Now how do we run it? We can just run it directly from the command
line, but recall that Skywing is intended to be a parallel system
running multiple agents at once, so let's do that. In deployment each
agent would run on a separate piece of hardware, but let's just run
all our agents on our local computer. To that end, we will create a
script that starts up all our agents for us. Here is an example run
script that does so:

```
<run.sh>
#!/bin/bash

size_of_collective=2
starting_port=20000
for (( agent_ind = 0; agent_ind < $size_of_collective-1 ; agent_ind++ ))
do
    ./ex1 node$agent_ind $((starting_port+$agent_ind)) &
done
./ex1 node$agent_ind $((starting_port+$agent_ind))
```

We run this and we get an output like the following:
```
$ source run.sh
Hello Skywing world from agent node0!
Hello Skywing world from agent node1!
[1]+  Done                    ./ex1 node$agent_ind $((starting_port+$agent_ind))
```

This program obviously doesn't do very much; it doesn't even establish
any connections with other agents. In our [next tutorial](02.\ Publishing\ and\ Subscribing.md),
we will look into how agents communicate.