# Constructing and Using Iterative Methods

### Prerequisites

Skywing makes heavy use of C++'s templating capability. To better
understand this section, it is highly recommended that readers
familiarize themselves with the following C++ topics:
 * C++ templates.
 * C++ partial template specialization.
 * C++ lambda functions.
(If you find any online tutorials on these topics you find
particularly helpful, please let me know and I'll update this tutorial
with links to them!)

## Direct vs. Iterative Methods

Skywing solves most problems through iterative methods. In fact, even
problems that one normally thinks of as direct, such as computing a
mean, are typically solved in Skywing via iterative methods. The reason
for this is resilience: direct methods are often inherently
sequential, relying on certain operations completing before another
can continue. For example, the typical way of computing a mean
requires *first* computing a sum of a set of numbers, and *then*
dividing by the size of the set. To compute a mean in this way, Skywing
would need to somehow provide a guarantee that all terms in the sum
have been accounted for before dividing; given that Skywing collectives
are unstructured, and of unknown size, with unknown network and agent
speeds, such a guarantee would be very difficult of obtain. Iterative
methods, on the other hand, enable Skywing collectives to jointly
converge towards a solution at whatever rate the collective achieves
at the moment, with no need to difficult checks of doneness
conditions. (And yes, we have iterative methods for computing a
mean. More than one, actually. We'll get to that.)

*Note:* It is important to draw a distinction between the *local*
  doneness guarantees provided by the Waiter, and the *collective*
  doneness guarantees we are trying to avoid by employing iterative
  methods. The Waiter is simply a programming construct that allows us
  to write nice code **as long as** we have a way for an agent to
  determine the doneness of something for which it is
  waiting. Therefore, the Waiter is appropriate for checking local
  conditions on an individual Agent, such as whether or not a
  subscription has completed. It does not, however, provide us with
  any method of determing doneness for a collective operation.

## Constructing an Iterative Method via Templates

Skywing provides a flexible, template-based system for constructing
iterative methods through iterative methods frameworks that are filled
out by providing template parameters that describe specific
functionality. In these frameworks, each agent subscribes to iterative
updates from a set of neighbors, applies some local update method when
it receives neighbor data, and then publishes its own update for its
subscribed neighbors to receive. The local update method must be
designed carefully to enable collective convergence towards a desired
solution.

Currently, Skywing provides two iterative frameworks:
 * `SynchronousIterative` is a class template in which an agent waits until it receives each of its immediate neighbors' updates before applying its own. Available in `skywing/skywing_mid/synchronous_iterative.hpp`.
 * `AsynchronousIterative` is a class template that does not wait for all its neighbors, applying its own update method as fast as it desires with whatever data are currently available. Available in `skywing/skywing_mid/asynchronous_iterative.hpp`.

These two iterative frameworks require the user provide a set of template parameters:
 * The `Processor` describes the local update method each agent employs.
 * The `StoppingCriterion` tells the agent when it should finish the iterative computation.
 * The `ResiliencePolicy` tells the agent how it should respond when a neighbor dies or has some other problem.

Additionally, the `AsynchronousIterative` class template also takes
 * A `PublishPolicy` parameter, which describes when the agent should publish a new update.

### Collectivey Computing a Mean

Let's look at an example of using this functionality. The
`SynchronousIterative` class template can be seen in
`skywing/skywing_mid/synchronous_iterative.hpp`. We will make use of an
averaging algorithm called Push Flow; the processor that implements
this is available in `skywing/skywing_mid/push_flow_processor.hpp`.

To set up this application, we go through the normal boilerplate of
making initial agent connections. Then we use a set of `using`
statements to build up the iterative method we want to execute as a
type. This looks like the following:
```
using MeanProcessor = PushFlowProcessor<double, double>;
using IterMethod = SynchronousIterative
  <MeanProcessor, StopAfterTime, TrivialResiliencePolicy>;
```
The `StopAfterTime` and `TrivialResiliencePolicy` types are defined by
Skywing itself, and simply indicate that we will run for a given amount
of time and that we won't do anything in particular resilience-wise.

With our iterative method type defined, we need to build it. Iterative
methods often need to initiate some additional publications and
subscriptions before we can execute it, so we don't actually build the
method itself, but instead build a Waiter that eventually returns the
`IterMethod`.

Remember the WaiterBuilder mentioned in the previous tutorial? We use
this here to construct a waiter to the `IterMethod`. In the file
`skywing/skywing_mid/synchronous_iterative.hpp`, there is also defined a
**partial template specialization** of the WaiterBuilder class
template for `SynchronousIterative` types. We'll go into more details
about how it works in a future tutorial, but for now, here's how you
use it:

1. Construct a `WaiterBuilder<IterMethod>` in which you pass a handle
to the Skywing Manager, the job handle, the tag ID this agent will
publish during the iterativ emethod, and the tag IDs to which this
agent will subscribe during the iterative method.

2. Call `set_procesor`, `set_stop_policy`, and `set_resilience_policy`
on that WaiterBuilder to construct needed information about the
sub-pieces of this SynchronousIterative method. The exact parameters
you need to pass to each one depends on the template parameters you
chose.

3. Call `build_waiter` to return a `Waiter<IterMethod>` object that
will return the ready-to-go `IterMethod`.

Altogether, this call looks something like this:
```
Waiter<IterMethod> iter_waiter =
  WaiterBuilder<IterMethod>(manager_handle, job, pubTagID, tagIDs_for_sub)
  .set_processor(starting_value)
  .set_stop_policy(std::chrono::seconds(10))
  .set_resilience_policy()
  .build_waiter();
```

Next, we obtain the ready-to-go iterative method object by calling `get` on the Waiter:
```
IterMethod mean_method = iter_waiter.get();
```

Finally, we call `run` on the method to execute it. Optionally, we can
pass a lambda function that gets call each iteration to print outputs:
```
  mean_method.run(
      [&](const IterMethod& p)
      {
        std::cout << p.run_time().count() << "ms: Machine " << machine_number
                  << " has value " << p.get_processor().get_value()
                  << std::endl;
      } );
```

When we put it all together, we get a program that looks like this:
```
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
#include <chrono>
#include <string>
#include "skywing_core/skywing.hpp"
#include "skywing_mid/synchronous_iterative.hpp"
#include "skywing_mid/push_flow_processor.hpp"
#include "skywing_mid/stop_policies.hpp"
#include "skywing_mid/publish_policies.hpp"

std::vector<size_t> ports{20000, 20001, 20002};
std::vector<std::string> tagIDs {"tag0", "tag1", "tag2"};

int main(const int argc, const char* const argv[])
{
  using namespace skywing;
  size_t machine_num = std::stoul(argv[1]);
  std::string machine_name = std::string("machine") + argv[1];
  Manager manager(ports[machine_num], machine_name);
  auto pubsub_job = [&](Job& job, ManagerHandle manager_handle)
  {
    // make initial connections
    if (machine_num > 0)
      while (!manager_handle.connect_to_server("localhost", ports[machine_num-1]).get()) ;

    double val_to_contribute = 100.0 * machine_num;

    using MeanMethod = PushFlowProcessor<double, double>;
    using IterMethod = SynchronousIterative
      <MeanMethod, StopAfterTime, TrivialResiliencePolicy>;
    Waiter<IterMethod> iter_waiter =
      WaiterBuilder<IterMethod>(manager_handle, job, tagIDs[machine_num], tagIDs)
        .set_processor(val_to_contribute)
        .set_stop_policy(std::chrono::seconds(10))
       .set_resilience_policy()
       .build_waiter();

    IterMethod mean_method = iter_waiter.get();

    mean_method.run([&](const IterMethod& p)
    {
      std::cout << p.run_time().count() << "ms: Machine " << machine_num
                << " has value " << p.get_processor().get_value()
                << std::endl;
    } );
 
  };
  manager.submit_job("job", pubsub_job);
  manager.run();
}
```

### Running it

We compile it with the same type of command as last time:
```
g++ -std=c++17 ex3.cpp -o ex3 -I$(skywing_root)/skywing -I$(skywing_root)/subprojects/spdlog/include -I$(skywing_root)/subprojects/gsl/include -I$(skywing_root)/build/generated_files/generated `pkg-config capnp --cflags --libs` -L$(skywing_root)/build/skywing/skywing_core -lskywing_core
```

Like before, we will use a bash script to start up the processes
running the Skywing agents. This time we will use a slightly more
sophisticated script that keeps track of the created processes, and
automatically kills them after awhile. This is to ensure that, in case
anything going wrong, you don't wind up with a bunch of lost processes
still running on your computer:
```
#!/bin/bash

trap kill_progs EXIT
kill_progs() {
  for (( ind=0 ;  ind < size_of_collective ; ind++ ))
  do
      var="erase${ind}"
    kill -9 ${!var} > /dev/null 2> /dev/null
  done
}

size_of_collective=3
for (( agent_ind = 0; agent_ind < $size_of_collective ; agent_ind++ ))
do
    echo ./ex3 $agent_ind
    ./ex3 $agent_ind &
    declare "erase${agent_ind}=$!"
done
sleep 15
kill_progs
```

Alright, we are ready to go! We run this and get an output like the following:
```
$ source run3.sh 
./ex3 0
./ex3 1
./ex3 2
39ms: Machine 2 has value 200
40ms: Machine 1 has value 100
40ms: Machine 0 has value 60
90ms: Machine 2 has value 128.571
91ms: Machine 1 has value 107.143
90ms: Machine 0 has value 97.6744
140ms: Machine 2 has value 99.1304
141ms: Machine 1 has value 91.3043
141ms: Machine 0 has value 96.1003
191ms: Machine 2 has value 105.16
191ms: Machine 1 has value 97.7132
191ms: Machine 0 has value 99.7357
241ms: Machine 2 has value 100.924
242ms: Machine 1 has value 99.4677
242ms: Machine 0 has value 100.044
291ms: Machine 2 has value 100.147
292ms: Machine 1 has value 99.8869
292ms: Machine 0 has value 100.026
342ms: Machine 2 has value 100.02
343ms: Machine 1 has value 99.9778
343ms: Machine 0 has value 100.008
392ms: Machine 2 has value 100.002
393ms: Machine 1 has value 99.996
393ms: Machine 0 has value 100.002
442ms: Machine 2 has value 100
444ms: Machine 1 has value 99.9993
444ms: Machine 0 has value 100
493ms: Machine 2 has value 99.9999
494ms: Machine 1 has value 99.9999
494ms: Machine 0 has value 100
543ms: Machine 2 has value 100
544ms: Machine 1 has value 100
544ms: Machine 0 has value 100
593ms: Machine 2 has value 100
595ms: Machine 1 has value 100
595ms: Machine 0 has value 100
644ms: Machine 2 has value 100
645ms: Machine 1 has value 100
645ms: Machine 0 has value 100
694ms: Machine 2 has value 100
695ms: Machine 1 has value 100
696ms: Machine 0 has value 100
745ms: Machine 2 has value 100
746ms: Machine 1 has value 100
746ms: Machine 0 has value 100
795ms: Machine 2 has value 100
796ms: Machine 1 has value 100
796ms: Machine 0 has value 100
845ms: Machine 2 has value 100
846ms: Machine 1 has value 100
847ms: Machine 0 has value 100
896ms: Machine 2 has value 100
897ms: Machine 1 has value 100
897ms: Machine 0 has value 100
```